---
layout: post
title: Three Books that I Recommend
categories: growth
date:  2025-07-06 18:00:05 +0530
---

As I see it, there are different forms of human existence. Some people dont have the mental capacity to know why they are the way they are. They act solely based on their day to day emotional reactions to events. They dont have the capacity to understand others or their circumstances. Then, some people realize that their circumstances/mental state is not good. However, they keep strugging through life clueless about what to do to get out of that state. Then some people realize their sorry state and work their way out of it. They encounter something - be a book, a friend, a mentor, an event etc. that guides them to get out of their state and raise above it. Then there are some who are lucky to be in a state that naturally allows them to be the best. They are the ones who reach epitome of their capacity and become wealthy (not rich, but wealthy - in all aspects).

I am talking about this because I belong to the second category. I realize I am in a sub-optimal state, but I am a slave of my addictions - whatever they are. What can I do to come out of it is something I dont know. I keep reading books, especially the self help ones, in the hope that one or the other just clicks and I see what I should do to come out of my state.

In that journey, I think, three books stand out for me in their ability or effectiveness to propel a person from lower state to higher states of existence - Breaking the Habit of Being Yourself, Meditation for Mortals and Advice on Upskilling, in that order.

Breaking the Habit of Being Yourself is a great book that has two important contributions, in my opinion. The first part is about understanding one's past self. Unless we understand why we are the way we are, it is difficult to change oneself. If we dont understand our past self, then we continue to repeat the same patterns and we continue to have the same existence. That is why this book is quintessential. It tells us what we have been doing so far because of which we have such a sorry state of life. It shows ourselves naked infront of us - how we are programmed to react to events in a specific way. The second part of the book deals with quantum world. Crazy as it may sound, but this is where there is potential for true change. It so elegantly explains that in a quantum world, everything is a possibility. What you focus on is what materializes in your world. Given that, why focus on bad things and good old patterns? Why not focus, instead, on positive things in our life? It needs conscious will to overcome our old patterns of thought and instead focus on new ones. But once we do that, there is no stopping us. Because our brains cannot distinguish between a real physical experience and vividly imagined mental experience, we use it to our advantage to visualize experience and Joe Dispenza's (book author) theory is that you will attract experiences that your brain is sending waves out for!!

The next one is Meditation for Mortals by Oliver Burkeman. If I could summarize the book in just one sentence, then it is that we are mortals - i.e. our time, our abilities, our possibilities are all limited and we should be ok with it. The chapters are small and carry good nuggets of wisdom on how to accept our limitations and live with it. Amazing book. It really convinces us that we are limited and its ok to live lives in a limited fashion.

Once you are through you - understand and overcome yourself, accept your limitations, the next book by Justin Skycak talks about how to upskill yourself. Some solid practical advice that one can mindlessly follow to grow oneself in the field of our choice. Highly recommended!!

There is one thing - one core thing - that is still missing. I have not come across this in any book. I doubt, if I ever will. That is finding our what you want to do with your life. No book can teach you that. You can have to give meaning to life yourself. That is what brings life to life. I dont know how to do that. I think everyone should strive to find meaning and purpose in life. May be it needs some qualities in a person to start searching for purpose.
